# miRAW Wrapper


##  Introduction
This Python script provides a series of pre- and post- processing functions to simplify usage of the **miRAW** target prediction tool. Pre-processing involves setting up shell scripts for bulk target prediction tasks. Post-processing involves filtering target prediction results according to different parameters

## Pre-processing & Setting up a miRAW run
The basic requirements for setting up a miRAW run are:
 
* a list of miRNAs
* a list of 3'UTR targets
* a candidate site selection model

In addition, paths to the miRAW jar file and trained model need to be specified.

The complete set of parameters that can be specified are as follows:

### Experiment Name
`"-e", "--exptName"`
This is the name given to the script, to make it easier to identify.

### Deep Learning model
`-d/--dlModel`
See the miRAW README.md on how to build your own model. But miRAW comes with one trained model for human miRNAs.

### Out Folder
`"-o", "--outFolder"`
the full path to where the results will be written. This allows the user to generate scripts to execute **miRAW** on a remote machine.

### Candidate Site Selection Model (CSSM)
`"-c", "--cssm"`
the type of candidate site model used in the prediction. This can be set to this can be **Regular**, **Pita**, **targetScan** or **Personalized**

### UnifiedFile Path
`-u/--unifiedFile`
miRAW takes a single input file that contains both the query **miRNAs** and **3'UTR** sequences. You can specify the path to an existing file or you can generate one by specifying both a miRNA file `-m/--miRFile` and a 3'UTR file `-3/--3UTR`. Both these files should be in **fasta** format

### miRNA Fasta File
`"-m", "--mirnaFile"`
the full path to a file containing the **miRNA** sequences in FASTA format.

### 3'UTR Fasta File
`"-3", "--3UTR"`
the full path to a file containing the **3'UTR** sequences in FASTA format.

### How to write the results
`"-t", "--split"`
For large numbers of miRNAs and 3'UTR sequences, the generated results can be difficult to parse out. Therefore, they can be broken down and written out in different ways.

- `-t/--split=0`
: use existing unified File (specified with `-u/--unifiedFile`)
- `-t/--split=1`
: write by miRNA (single file for all predictions) 
- `-t/--split=2`
: write by 3'UTR (single file for all predictions)
- `-t/--split=3`
: split by miRNA (separate file for each miRNA)
- `-t/--split=4`
: split by 3'UTR (separate file for each 3'UTR)



### jar file location
`"-j", "--jarLoc"`
the full path to where the **miRAW.jar** executable is stored on the local machine. The jar file is packaged with the script. This uses more disk space, but it simplifies the script building process.


miRAW uses a sliding window to analyze a 3'UTR, so the default values will use a sliding window of 40nt with a step size of 5nt. Generally, there isn't much advantage in changing these values.

### maximum site length
`"-W", "--maximum_site_length"`
target site size (in nucleotides). default 40nt 

### seed alignment offset
`"-S", "--seed_alignment_offset"`
step_size (in nucleotides). default 5nt.

### energy filtering
`"-E", "--energy_filtering"`
for conservative models (i.e. pita and targetScan) performance improves in the absence of energy filtering. for miRAW models using extended seed regions, performance improves when energy filtering is used. This flag allows you turn to turn on / off energy filtering. Allowed values are (`True`/`False`).



### Example parameters
```
-e 186712beta 
-d /Users/simonray/DropboxUiO/dropData/miraw/bestModel.bin 
-j /Users/simonray/DropboxUiO/dropData/miraw/miRAW.jar
-o /Users/simonray/data/186712beta
--cssm Personalised;10:1:7
-m /Users/simonray/DropboxUiO/dropData/mirbase/22.1/hsa_22pt1uniq.fa
-3 /Users/simonray/DropboxUiO/dropData/ensembl/ensembl_hsa_3utrs.uniq.fa
--split=4
--energy_filtering=True
```


### Useful commands

The following will flatten a FASTA file so that each sequence is only on one line
```
 awk '/^>/ {printf("%s%s\n",(N>0?"\n":""),$0);N++;next;} {printf("%s",$0);} END {printf("\n");}' < ensembl_hsa_3utrs.uniq.fa > ensembl_hsa_3utrs.uniq_flat.fa
```


```
grep -w -A 1 -f test.txt ensembl_hsa_3utrs.uniq_flat.fa |grep -v -- "^--$"
```



# filterAndPoolMiRAWpredictions

##  Introduction
This takes a set of miRAW predictions and pools them after filtering

The script is trying to fulfill many tasks at the same time, so it is still evolving

## Parameters
Current Parameters are:

```
"-r", "--resultsfile", "list of result files to process"
"-f", "--featurelist", "list of features to select from the predictions"
"-u", "--upregulated", "list of upregulated proteins")
"-d", "--downregulated", "list of upregulated proteins")
"-p", "--probability", "cut-off for min probability")
"-e", "--energy", "cut-off for min binding energy")
"-H", "--HelpMe", a"print detailed help")
``` 

Using `--resultsfile` to specify a list of *allTargetSites.csv* files the generated by **miRAW** for a set of genes (one file / gene) and `--probability` and `--energy` to set lower bounds for filtering,  the script will pool the remaining predictions into a single file and write to a TSV file that can be used for network visualisation (for example, by loading into **Cytoscape**)

## --resultsfile
This is a tab delimited file containing a list of target prediction results to be filtered. If you split the predictions by miRNA or mRNA then you will have multiple folders containing a target `allTargetSites.csv` file.  The format of the file is

```
INDEX	CHANGE	FILE
1	X	/Users/happybunny/data/hb_miraw_predictions/mirna1/allTargetSites.csv
2	X	/Users/happybunny/data/hb_miraw_predictions/mirna2/allTargetSites.csv
3	X	/Users/happybunny/data/hb_miraw_predictions/mirna3/allTargetSites.csv
```

The `INDEX` column is just to make it easier to read the file. The `CHANGE` column can be used to specify matching information about the change in the measured expression level of the target (i.e.. up or down regulated). `FILE` is the location of the `allTargetSites.csv` to be filtered.

You can get a list of all the `allTargetSites.csv` files using the following command in the terminal

```
> find /Users/happybunny/data/hb_miraw_predictions/ -name *allTargetSites.csv
```

## Current Issues
### Gene Names
One of the issues is that the gene name must take one of two formats:

#### Long Format
```
ACCESSION_ID1|ACCESSION_ID2|SHORT GENE NAME|START POSITION|END POSITION
```
For example
```
ENSG00000071575|ENST00000155926|TRIB2|12740795|12742734
```
Where `ACCESSION_ID1` and `ACCESSION_ID2` are gene accession numbers in public databases (e.g. **Ensembl ID** and **NCBI RefGene ID**) and `SHORT GENE NAME` is the user friendly name used in the literature. 

#### Short Format
If the naming convention doesn't follow this format (the code looks for the presence of the `|` character in the gene string), then it just uses the full string.


# An example of target prediction set up and filtering 

## 1. create the fasta files you need for the target prediction

The simplest case is you already have a list of miRNAs , and a list of 3'UTRs targets. In this case, you can skip to step 2.

A more common situation is that you have a complete list of all miRNAs and a complete list all 3'UTRs and you want to select a subset from each list

for example, **miRBase** provides a single file of all miRNAs in the database (`mature.fa`). To select the full set of miRNAs for *Homo sapiens* you can do the following:

```
grep hsa mature.fa grep -v "^--$" > hsa_mature.fa
```

where `hsa` is the three character code miRBase uses for human.


# miRAW null result error

we have a problem where we are getting no predictions for 40mer 3'UTR targets. This seems to be a culmination of several things

Firstly, the `-W` and `-S` flags don't work, so it is currently necessary to  modify the `MaxSiteLength` and `SeedAlignmentOffset` in the `.properties` file.

I used the following test sequences

###miRNA
```
>hsa-let-7b-5p MIMAT0000063 Homo sapiens let-7b-5p
UGAGGUAGUAGGUUGUGUGGUU
```

###3'UTRs
```
>3utr_unique.45_no
CCTCCCCACCCTGCCACTCTTGACATTCCACTGTGCGTTTCCTC
>3utr_unique.46_yes
CCTCCCCACCCTGCCACTCTTGACATTCCACTGTGCGTTTCCTCC
>3utr_unique.45_maybe
CTCCCCACCCTGCCACTCTTGACATTCCACTGTGCGTTTCCTCC
```

### properties
```
CandidateSiteFinder.Type=pita
MaxSiteLength=40
SeedAlignmentOffset=5
Filter0.AccessibilityEnergy;11
```

### command is

```
python3 /Users/simonray/eclipse-workspace/miraw_wrapper/miraw_wrap/miRAWbatch.py  -e 186712betaPita3mismatchENSGIDs  -d /usr/local/bin/bestModel.bin   -j /usr/local/bin/miRAW.jar  -o /users/simonray/Downloads/mirfail  --cssm 'pita'  -m /users/simonray/Downloads/mirfail/mirs.fa  -3 /users/simonray/Downloads/mirfail/3putrs.fa  --split 4  --energy_filtering
```

## Results
**3utr_unique.46__yes** returns a target prediction, whereas **3utr_unique.45__no** doesn't. Thus it seems to be something to do with the 46nt > (MaxSiteLength + SeedAlignmentOffset) (40 + 5)

so, it seems that it necessary to go into the miRAW code to find where this check is performed. 




